Change include/exclude recommendations (#5)
stac-api-extensions/fields: README.md

fields in Item Properties to be prefixed with `properties.` or not, or support use of both the prefixed and non-prefixed
name, e.g., `properties.datetime` or `datetime`.

## Include/Exclude Semantics

> 1. If `fields` attribute is specified as an empty object (for POST requests), an empty string (for GET requests),
> or with both `include` and `exclude` set to null or an
> empty array, then the recommended behavior is to include only fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If `fields` attribute is specified as an empty string (GET requests) or as an empty object or an object with both `include` and `exclude` set to either null or an
empty array (for POST requests), then the recommended behavior is to include only fields
```

> `type`, `stac_version`, `id`, `geometry`, `bbox`, `links`, `assets`, and `properties.datetime`; if `properties.datetime` is null, then it is recommended to include `properties.start_datetime` and `properties.end_datetime`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`type`, `stac_version`, `id`, `geometry`, `bbox`, `links`, `assets`, and `properties.datetime`. If `properties.datetime` is null, then it is recommended to include `properties.start_datetime` and `properties.end_datetime`.
```

These are the default fields to ensure a valid STAC Item is returned by default.
Implementations may choose to include other properties, e.g., `properties.created`, but the number
of default properties fields should be kept to a minimum.
2. If only `include` is specified, these fields should be the only fields included.
Any additional fields provided beyond those in the `include` list should be kept
to a minimum, as the caller has explicitly stated they do not need them.
3. If only `exclude` is specified, the specified fields fields should not be

> included in the response Item entity, but every other field available for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
included, but every other field available for the
```

    if `properties` is included and `properties.datetime` is excluded, then
    `datetime` should not be in `properties`.
6. If the same field is present in both `include` and `exclude`, it should be included.

### `null` vs. empty vs. missing

There is a semantic difference between a missing value (i.e., if `include` is not
in the JSON object), and a `null` or empty value.  The recommended behavior
around missing vs. null and empty values is described in [the section
above](#includeexclude-semantics), but is summarized here for reference. "ALL"
means that all of the Item's fields should be returned; "DEFAULT" means the
default set (i.e. the required fields for a valid STAC Item) should be returned.

| include | exclude | returned |
| -- | -- | -- |
| missing, `null`, or empty | missing, `null`, or empty | DEFAULT |
| ["a", "b"] | missing, `null`, or empty | ["a", "b"] |
| missing | ["a", "b"] | ALL except for ["a", "b"] |
| `null` or empty | ["a", "b"] | DEFAULT except for ["a", "b"] |
| ["a", "b"] | ["a"] | ["a", "b"] |
| ["a.b"] | ["a"] | `a.b` should be the only field in `a` |
| ["a"] | ["a.b"] | `a` should be included, but it should not include `a.b` |

> 

Reviewer: should it be an error if you include `a` and exclude `a` and `b`? I don't think it should be, but we should be explicit here as to whether it's a 400 or the extra exclude is ignored. I think ignore is the right behavior, since I could imagine querying different datasets, and always including an ignore for a large field that is only on some of them (though explicit includes is always the right way to go).

Author: Yeah, we call out [here](https://github.com/stac-api-extensions/fields/pull/5/files#diff-b335630551682c19a781afebcf4d07bf978fb1f8ac04c6bf87428ed5106870f5R101) that it should be included, and the third-to-last line of the table shows that case.

Reviewer: I don't see where that's called out, and [-3] is include a b exclude a

Author: Ok, I was misunderstanding, thanks for sticking with me. Yes, IMO it should be silently ignored -- I don't think we define any error-full (i.e. return 400) behavior in this extension, and this seems like too much of an edge case to start doing that. Added text and an example.

In this example, `include` is missing:

```json
{
  "fields": {
    "exclude": ["geometry"]
  }
}
```

In these two examples, `include` is `null` and empty, respectively:

```json
{
  "fields": {
    "include": null,
    "exclude": ["geometry"]
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "fields": {
    "include": [],
    "exclude": ["geometry"]
  }
}
```

The special case of both `include` and `exclude` missing is possible both in
JSON and text. In JSON:

```json
{
  "fields": {}
}
```

or

```json
{
  "fields": null
}
```

In text:

```text
?fields=
```

It is not possible to differentiate between missing, null, and empty for the
text representation, so implementations should assume the value is empty, NOT
missing. For example, this is a case of `include` being empty (NOT missing):

```text
?fields=-geometry

> ```

Author: What changes would you make to the text above this example? I _think_ it's saying what you're asking for but maybe it could be clearer?

> ## Examples

Reviewer: these need subheadings -- i had a hard time figuring out if the descriptions went with the code blocks above or below when dropped in the middle.

Return the default fields. This should return valid STAC Item entities.

Query Parameters

```text
?fields=
```

JSON

```json
{
  "fields": {
  }
}
```

> This has a similar effect as an empty object for `fields`, but it is up to the discretion of the implementation.

Reviewer: the "discretion" part of this is no longer true, right?

Author: It is still up to the implementation -- you _can_ include other fields as you see fit. I think the example use-case was a SAR catalog that always includes the SAR extension.

Reviewer: something like that.  Return *at least* the default fields, and any other you see fit. Also it's confusing that it says 'similar' -- is it exactly the same, or is it like it, but different? if different, how so? (I'm sure I could figure it out, but I'm trying to read this from the perspective of someone who doesn't already know the spec)

Author: Okay, I gave an alternative wording a shot, LMK what you think.

fields in Item Properties to be prefixed with `properties.` or not, or support use of both the prefixed and non-prefixed
name, e.g., `properties.datetime` or `datetime`.

## Include/Exclude Semantics

1. If `fields` attribute is specified as an empty object (for POST requests), an empty string (for GET requests),
or with both `include` and `exclude` set to null or an
empty array, then the recommended behavior is to include only fields
`type`, `stac_version`, `id`, `geometry`, `bbox`, `links`, `assets`, and `properties.datetime`.

> This default is so that the entity returned is a valid STAC Item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the default fields to ensure a valid STAC Item is returned by default
```

> `type`, `stac_version`, `id`, `geometry`, `bbox`, `links`, `assets`, and `properties.datetime`.

Reviewer: maybe should be properties.datetime but if datetime is null also properties.start_datetime and properties.end_datetime

Implementations may choose to include other properties, e.g., `properties.created`, but the number
of default properties attributes should be kept to a minimum.
2. If only `include` is specified, these attributes should be the only attributes included.

> If additional fields are provided beyond those in the `include` list, the number and size of
> these attributes should be kept to a minimum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any additional fields provided beyond those in the `include` list should be kept to a minimum, as the caller has explicitly stated they do not need them.
```

> 3. If only `exclude` is specified, these attributes fields should not be
> included in the response Item object, but every other fields available for the
> Item should be included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If only `exclude` is specified, the specified fields should not be
included in the response Item entity, but every other field available for the
Item should be included.
```

4. If `exclude` is specified and `include` is null or an empty
array, then the `exclude` attributes should be excluded from the default set.

> 5. For nested attributes (e.g. `properties.datetime`), the most specific path

Reviewer: let's change all the uses of `attribute` to `field` -- I think it's confusing to have both.

> 5. For nested fields (e.g. `properties.datetime`), the most specific path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. For nested fields (e.g., `properties.datetime`), the most specific path
```

should be honored first, and `include` should be preferred over `exclude`. For
example:
    1. If a field is in `exclude`, and a nested field of that field is in
    `include`, the nested field should be included, but no other nested
    fields in the field should be included.  For example, if `properties` is
    excluded and `properties.datetime` is included, then `datetime`
    should be the only nested field in `properties`.

>     2. If a field is in `include`, and a nested field is in `exclude`, the field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. If a field is in `include`, and a nested field of that field is in `exclude`, the field
```

to match wording in (1)

    should be included, and the nested field should be excluded.  For example,
    if `properties` is included and `properties.datetime` is excluded, then
    `datetime` should not be in `properties`.
6. If the same field is present in both `include` and `exclude`, it should be included.

> ### `null` vs empty vs missing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `null` vs. empty vs. missing
```

> There is a semantic difference between a missing value (i.e. if `include` is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a semantic difference between a missing value (i.e., if `include` is not
```

in the JSON object), and a `null` or empty value.  The recommended behavior
around missing vs. null and empty values is described in [the section
above](#includeexclude-semantics), but is summarized here for reference. "ALL"
means that all of the Item's fields should be returned; "DEFAULT" means the
default set (i.e. the required fields for a valid STAC Item) should be returned.

| include | exclude | returned |
| -- | -- | -- |
| missing | missing | DEFAULT |
| `null` or empty | missing | DEFAULT |

> | `null` or empty | `null` or empty | DEFAULT |

Reviewer: this is missing `| missing | `null` or empty|` and I think all 4 cases can be reduced to missing, null, or empty for either is DEFAULT, no?

| ["a", "b"] | missing | ["a", "b"] |

> | ["a", "b"] | `null` or empty | ["a", "b"] |

Reviewer: these two can be collapsed to one `missing, null, or empty` for the exclude

| missing | ["a", "b"] | ALL except for ["a", "b"] |
| `null` or empty | ["a", "b"] | DEFAULT except for ["a", "b"] |

> | ["a", "b"] | ["a"] | ["a", "b"] |

Reviewer: I think there are a few more cases that should be in this table. One I can think of specifically is `properties` and `properties.datetime` for either includes or excludes.

In this example, `include` is missing:

```json
{
  "fields": {
    "exclude": ["geometry"]
  }
}
```

In these two examples, `include` is `null` and empty, respectively:

```json
{
  "fields": {
    "include": null,
    "exclude": ["geometry"]
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "fields": {
    "include": [],
    "exclude": ["geometry"]
  }
}
```

The special case of both `include` and `exclude` missing is possible both in
JSON and text. In JSON:

```json
{
  "fields": {}
}
```

or

```json
{
  "fields": null
}
```

In text:

```text
?fields=
```

It is not possible to differentiate between missing, null, and empty for the

> text representation, so implements should assume the value is empty, NOT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
text representation, so implementions should assume the value is empty, NOT
```

name, e.g., `properties.datetime` or `datetime`.

## Include/Exclude Semantics

1. If `fields` attribute is specified as an empty object (for POST requests), an empty string (for GET requests),
or with both `include` and `exclude` set to null or an
empty array, then the recommended behavior is to include only fields
`type`, `stac_version`, `id`, `geometry`, `bbox`, `links`, `assets`, and `properties.datetime`.
This default is so that the entity returned is a valid STAC Item.
Implementations may choose to include other properties, e.g., `properties.created`, but the number
of default properties attributes should be kept to a minimum.
2. If only `include` is specified, these attributes should be the only attributes included.
3. If only `exclude` is specified, these attributes should be subtracted from the full item.
This may result in an entity that is not a valid STAC Item.
4. If `exclude` is specified and `include` is null or an empty
array, then the `exclude` attributes should be excluded from the default set.
This may result in an entity that is not a valid STAC Item.

> 5. If a key is in `exclude`, and a sub-key is in `include`, the sub-key should be included, but no other fields

Author: I went with `field` and `nested attribute`, roughly following the verbage in https://github.com/stac-api-extensions/fields/blob/99e3612ec6bb58d27b1478c19b2bfe8e575cca1b/README.md?plain=1#L49-L50

## Include/Exclude Semantics 

> 1. If `fields` attribute is specified as an empty object, or with both `include` and `exclude` set to null or an

Reviewer: add the GET equivalent of an empty string

empty array, then the recommended behavior is to `include` the following keys:
`["id", "type", "geometry", "bbox", "links", "assets", "properties.datetime", "stac_version"]`.
This default is so that the entity returned is a valid STAC Item.

> Implementations may choose to add other properties, e.g., `created`, but the number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementations may choose to add other properties, e.g., `properties.created`, but the number
```

## Include/Exclude Semantics 

1. If `fields` attribute is specified as an empty object (for POST requests), an empty string (for GET requests),
or with both `include` and `exclude` set to null or an

> empty array, then the recommended behavior is to `include` the following keys:
> `["id", "type", "geometry", "bbox", "links", "assets", "properties.datetime", "stac_version"]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
empty array, then the recommended behavior is to include fields
`type`, `stac_version`, `id`, `geometry`, `bbox`, `links`, `assets`, and `properties.datetime`.
```

This default is so that the entity returned is a valid STAC Item.
Implementations may choose to add other properties, e.g., `properties.created`, but the number
of default properties attributes should be kept to a minimum.
2. If only `include` is specified, these attributes should be the only attributes included.
3. If only `exclude` is specified, these attributes are subtracted from the full item.
This may result in an entity that is not a valid STAC Item.

> 4. If `exclude` is specified and `include` is null or an empty

Reviewer: yeah, that might be better. as long as undefined and null have the same semantics, and the empty list / empty string means something intuitive.

> 4. If `exclude` is specified and `include` is null or an empty

Author: I added a new section w/ a summary table and examples, lmk what you think.

array, then the `exclude` attributes are subtracted from the default set.

> This may result in an entity that is not a valid STAC Item.

Author: There already is a warning here: https://github.com/stac-api-extensions/fields/blob/99e3612ec6bb58d27b1478c19b2bfe8e575cca1b/README.md?plain=1#L58-L61

Should we pull or copy that to this section? Or do you reckon that warning is enough?

    if `properties` is included and `properties.datetime` is excluded, then
    `datetime` should not be in `properties`, but every other nested field should be.
6. If the same field is present in both `include` and `exclude`, it should be included.

> 7. If the a field is not present in `include`, but it is in `exclude`, it should be excluded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. If a field is not present in `include`, but it is present in `exclude`, it should be excluded.
```

}
```

> Return the `id`, `type`, `geometry`, and the Properties field `eo:cloud_cover`.

Reviewer: maybe also mention here that if the geometry is excluded and you still want to return a valid STAC Item, you can set geometry to null and return the (smaller) bbox value instead.

Author: That _feels_ like a violation of the `exclude` semantics -- if I exclude something, that field shouldn't be present, right? Or is `null`ing something "good enough"?
